---
layout: post
title: "Endgame: Bobby Fischer's Remarkable Rise and Fall—From America's Brightest Prodigy to the Edge of Madness"
author: "Frank Brady"
publisher: "Crown"
pages: 402
date_read: nan
my_rating: 4
avg_rating: 3.94
tags: ["frank-brady", "biography", "lang-en"]
---

When I was 11-12 years old, in the late 80s, my father gave me a chess set and the game became a hobby for me.<br/><br/>It was the peak of the Karpov-Kasparov era but my father told me about this brilliant player, Bobby Fischer, who had won the World Championship and simply vanished from competitive chess (and from the public eye, as well) without notice. This made me very curious about Fischer's life and, in this book, Frank Brady presented an excellent work about him on and off the board. Fischer's life is anything but ordinary. Starting with his childhood with his wacky mother and absent father. That explains a lot about Fischer's behavior later in life.<br/><br/>Brady show us that chess permeated Fischer's life since early childhood. There are very interesting passages in the book showing that chess was the first thing Fischer did after waking up and the last thing before going to sleep. Fischer even had a floating chessboard to use during baths. He was a chess prodigy and became a sure presence in NYC chessclubs. <br/><br/>As a teenager, Fischer became a Grand Master and started contending for the World Chess Championship. And here, Fischer started his first "war". That war was against the Russians and the real cold war served as a good backdrop. Fischer made several accusations about match fixing between Russian players during the 1962 Candidates Tournament in Curacao. He even "quit" competitive chess for a while because of that. When the International Chess Federation (FIDE) changed the format to avoid collusion, Fischer returned and had the greatest chess run of all time in 1970-71 and easily qualified to be the challenger in the next World Chess Championship. <br/><br/>In 1972, he fought Boris Spassky in Reykjavik and the match itself is one of the most fascinating chess events of all time. It even became subject of movies. The Cold War was at its peak. The Soviets had a strong grip of the championship since 1948 and Fischer was the first challenger outside the USSR. The negotiations for the match were tough and until the very last moment no one knew if Fischer was going to be present. Many people sees all these shenanigans by Fischer as mindgames to throw Spassky out of balance. Even Henry Kissinger made a phone call to persuade Fischer to play. The match itself had some brilliant games (games 6 and 13 are the ones that come to mind).    <br/><br/>After 1972, Fischer became a household name in TV shows and chess exploded in popularity in the United States. Check out <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QxvnEwvgfeI">this fascinating interview</a> with Johnny Carson. But, unfortunately everything went downhill after that. The failed negotiations for the 1975 match against Karpov and an increased paranoia started to take its toll on Fischer's mental health. The book provide a couple of examples during Fischer's wilderness years. Fischer also became increasingly anti-jew and openly hostile against the United States. His chess match against Spassky in Yugoslavia-1992 is a clear example - violating the American sanctions against Yugoslavia. <br/><br/>He became a wanted man and in 2004 he was arrested in Japan but thanks to his fame in Iceland, he was able to obtain an Icelandic passport and avoid jail in America. The book finishes showing Fischer's later life in Iceland. This book is a great read about one of the greatest chess players of all time. Worth a read.<br/>

