---
layout: post
title: "Rise of the Robots: Technology and the Threat of a Jobless Future"
author: "Martin Ford"
publisher: "Basic Books"
pages: 368
date_read: 2021/02/02
my_rating: 3
avg_rating: 3.96
tags: ["martin-ford", "ai", "tech", "lang-en"]
---

Everytime a book about the future of jobs in the automation age reaches the bookstores, we all think "Here is another prophet of doom. People will be able to adapt and everything will be ok."<br/><br/>In this book, Martin Ford tells us that this time will be different. He starts with some examples currently happening in the retail sector. Amazon, with their same day delivery, threaten local retail store jobs and at the same time threatens their own warehouse jobs, since it will be much more efficient to automate the warehouses in order to fulfill the same-day delivery. Other examples of blue collar jobs already going down is the explosion of vending machines and self-service kiosks.<br/><br/>As Ford tells us in the book, the crisis-recovery cycles are destroying more jobs during the recessions than creating jobs during the recoveries. Another warning sign in the book is that these new jobs are usually low-wage retail or highly specialized, creating a kind of hourglass shape in the job market where middle range jobs are decimated. These lower tier jobs are the ones in high risk of short term replacement by automation but the higher end jobs are not safe at all, according to Ford. Several companies already deployed systems to track their workers' emails, phone records, keystrokes, and so on. This type of data which is currently being for people and HR management purposes can be in mid- and long-term be used to develop automated version of some high-end activities. <br/><br/>Ford, then, speculates a bit on what will happen to several sectors in our society such as higher education and healthcare. Some interesting discussions also arise, for example, on the ownership if cars in the era of self-driving cars. There will be a cascade effect associated to that. We currently have car dealers, car repair shops and gas station all scattered around mainly due to the distributed nature of car ownership. What will happen with these businesses if the car ownership model changes?<br/><br/>The book concludes that some kind of basic income must be provided  for all those displaced workers. I really have some mixed thoughts on this subject. On one hand all of this automation saves a lot of time and may generate more wealth overall. On the other hand, as we are already observing today, this extra wealth will be concentrated in very few hands and the remnants will be showered to the rest in the form of a universal basic income to 'appease the peasants'. I really don't like how this future will be good for us. The human being is purpose-driven and this future is looking more and more like a feudal system, with no perspective of social mobility. The book should have discussed a little bit more this kind of societal implications.

